[Docs] Document consensus orchestration (#951)
pokt-network/pocket: consensus/README.md

  J --> note2
```

> ## Synchronization between the consensus processes

Reviewer: Make sure to install [1] https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=yzhang.markdown-all-in-one so that the table of contents is updated on save.

[1]

The consensus module currently depends on the `PaceMaker`, `StateSync`, `LeaderElection`, `Networking`.
It has a bootstrapping state where it:
  * Initializes connections to the network through a bootstrap node

>   * Gets the latest block then switches to one of the mutually exclusive modes: `sync` or `consensus`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Gets the latest block before switching to one of two mutually exclusive modes: `sync` or `consensus`
```

  * Keeps an updated current height (the greatest block height seen on the network)

```mermaid

> sequenceDiagram
> participant Consensus
> participant StateSync
> Note over Node: This embeds Networking, FSM
> participant Node
> participant Network
> Node->>Node:Start
> Node->>Network:Join
> loop
>   Node->>Network:RequestCurrentHeight
>   Network-->>Node: 
>   Node->>Node:SwitchMode
> end
> alt SyncMode
>   par
>     Node->>Consensus:Pause
>   and
>     Node->>StateSync:Start
>     Note over Node,StateSync: Details omitted for another diagram
>     StateSync-->>Node:SyncDone
>   end
> else ConsensusMode
>   par
>     Node->>StateSync:Pause
>   and
>     Node->>Consensus:Start
>     Consensus-->>Node:OutOfSync
>   end
> end

Reviewer: Great diagram!

I just edited newlines, whitespaces, spacing and section activations to improve readability. Can you do the same below?

```suggestion
sequenceDiagram
    participant Consensus
    participant StateSync
    Note over Node: This embeds Networking, FSM
    participant Node
    participant Network

    Node->>Node: Start
    Node->>Network: Join
    loop
        Node->>+Network: RequestCurrentHeight
        Network-->>-Node: 
        Node->>Node: SwitchMode
    end
    
    alt SyncMode
        par
            Node->>Consensus: Pause
        and
            Node->>+StateSync: Start
            Note over Node,StateSync: Details omitted for another diagram
            StateSync-->>-Node: SyncDone
        end
    else ConsensusMode
        par
            Node->>StateSync:Pause
        and
            Node->>+Consensus:Start
            Consensus-->>-Node:OutOfSync
        end
    end
```

```

### StateSync Mode

> In this mode the node is behind the latest known-to-network height and will try to catchup by downloading then applying the downloaded blocks (sequentially) to its local state.

Reviewer: Nice. Two, very short, very useful sentences!

The `download` and `apply` routines may run in parallel, but `apply` may be blocked by the former if the needed block is missing, it will wait until the needed blocks are downloaded.

#### Download routine

* The `download` routine is alive as long as `sync` mode is on
* It checks in its persistence for the latest downloaded block and tries to get and add to its persistence all the blocks; up to the network current height
* After downloading, and before inserting the block, basic (stateless) verification is made to the block
* A downloaded and inserted block is a structurally valid block but should by no mean considered valid w.r.t. its validators signatures or transactions within

```mermaid

> sequenceDiagram

Reviewer: Consider adding titles: https://github.com/mermaid-js/mermaid/issues/3927

participant Persistence
Note over Node: (Download routine)
participant Node
participant Network
par
  loop

>   Note left of Network: Constantly asking for the highest<br /> known block from network

Reviewer: Consider using activations: https://mermaid.js.org/syntax/sequenceDiagram.html#activations

Author: How would I use it?

Reviewer: Similar to my comment from yesterday here: https://github.com/pokt-network/pocket/pull/951#discussion_r1280001737

![Screenshot 2023-08-01 at 11 47 40 AM](https://github.com/pokt-network/pocket/assets/1892194/6551e4ec-47c9-49a4-8897-f9c2882fd8d8)

But I noticed that you did not include it in the edits.

Let me know if:
1. Did it not make sense?
2. If you disagree?
3. If you just need more details/clarification of why I think it's appropriate

  Node->>Network:UpdateNetWorkCurrentHeight
  Network-->>Node: 
  end
and
  Node->>Persistence:GetLastDownloadedBlock
  Persistence-->>Node: 
  loop LastDownloadedBlock < NetworkCurrentHeight
    Node->>Network:GetBlock
    Network-->>Node: 
    Note left of Network: Currently the node asks all the network<br />for the block it wants to download
    Node->>Persistence:Append
    Persistence-->>Node: 
    Note left of Node: append if new block
    Node->>Node:Wait(until new block)
    Note right of Node: If latest network block is reached<br />Wait until it increments to continue
  end
end

> ```

Reviewer: This diagram is absolute 🔥 !

_Note: We do not detail how individual transactions are applied or how state is derived from them. Just assume that the state (specifically validator set) may be mutated after each block application._

* The `apply` routine remains alive as long as `sync` mode is on
* It needs a starting state (genesis, or loaded local state) to build blocks from
* Each block is validated and applied before moving to the next one
* The block application begins at the genesis block (1) and sequentially processes additional blocks until it arrives at the head of the chain (i.e the most recent block or highest block height)
* Since basic validation is done at the download step and assumes that the Pocket node trusts its persistence layer, it is safe to skip basic re-validation
* The `apply` mechanism needs to maintain a chain of trust while applying blocks by performing the following:
  * Before applying block at height `h`, verify that it is signed by a quorum from the validator set at height `h-1`; note that the genesis validator set is used for block `1`
  * By applying each block, the validator set is updated (validators joining or leaving), starting from genesis validator set for any new node

> * With this chain of trust form a total of `3t+1` validators, where at least `2t+1` validators are honest and live. A synching node systematically detects invalid blocks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* With this chain of trust form a total of `3t+1` validators, where at least `2t+1` validators are honest and live. A syncing node systematically detects invalid blocks
```

  * No malicious or faulty node could inject an alternative block without making at least `2t+1` validators sign it
  * The persistence layer is used as a resume point for the block application, so a node won't restart block application from genesis each time it's rebooted

> * When the routine applies `NetworkCurrentHeight`, it signals it so the node could switch to `consensus` mode. Meanwhile, it waits to apply a new downloaded block

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* When the routine applies a block with height that matches `NetworkCurrentHeight`, it triggers a signal, prompting the node to transition into `consensus` mode. Meanwhile, it waits to apply a new downloaded block.
```

  end
```

## Consensus Mode

In this mode, the current node is up to date w.r.t. the latest block applied by the network and can start now participating to the consensus process.

This process is driven by:
* A pace maker, that alerts the consensus flow about key timings in the block production process
  * `MinBlockTime`: The earliest time a leader node should reap the mempool and start proposing a new block
  * `RoundTimeout`: The amount time a replicas wait before starting a new round
* A random but deterministic process to elect the leader of each round
  * Given a unique random seed known to all validators and information about the current (height, round) being validated, any validator is able to know who is the leader without needing to communicate with others
  * The leader election strategy aims to give validators a chance of leading the round proportional to their stake
  * Fallback to a round robin strategy if probabilistic election doesn't work
* A consensus flow that aims to increment the height (thus block production) of the chain
  * See [Block Generation](#block-generation)

### PaceMaker block proposal delaying

> The pace maker ensures minimum block production time with the aim to have a constant production pace.

Reviewer: pacemaker is one word

  par
    loop
      Note left of Network: Constantly asking for the highest<br /> known block from network
      Node->>Network:UpdateNetworkCurrentHeight
      Network-->>Node: 
    end
  and
    Node->>Persistence:GetLastDownloadedBlock
    Persistence-->>Node: 

    loop LastDownloadedBlock < NetworkCurrentHeight
      Node->>Network:GetBlock
      Network-->>Node: 
      Note left of Network: Currently the node asks all the network<br />for the block it wants to download

      Node->>Persistence:Append
      Persistence-->>Node: 
      Note left of Node: append if new block

      Node->>Node:Wait(until new block)
      Note right of Node: If latest network block is reached<br />Wait for a new block to continue
    end
  end
```

### Apply routine

_Note: We do not detail how individual transactions are applied or how state is derived from them. Just assume that the state (specifically validator set) may be mutated after each block application._

* The `apply` routine remains alive as long as `sync` mode is on
* It needs a starting state (genesis, or loaded local state) to build blocks from
* Each block is validated and applied before moving to the next one

> * The block application is a sequential process starting from genesis, applying blocks up till network current height

Reviewer 3: The block application begins at the genesis block (0) and sequentially processes additional blocks until it arrives at the head of the chain (i.e the most recent block or highest block height)

* Since basic validation is done at download step and assume that the Pocket node trusts its persistence layer, it is safe to skip basic revalidation
* The `apply` mechanism needs to maintain a chain of trust while applying blocks by performing the following:
  * Before applying a block `n`, verify that is is signed by a quorum of `n-1`'s validator set (genesis validator set for block `1`)
  * By applying each block, the validator set is updated (validators joining or leaving), starting from genesis validator set for any new node
* With this chain of trust, a synching node systematically detects invalid blocks
  * No malicious or faulty node could inject an alternative block without making at least `2t+1` validators sign it

>   * The persistence layer is mainly a cache for the block application, so a node won't restart block application from genesis each time it's rebooted

Author: Would be great to know more about others roles persistence have beside "snapshotting" previous derived states.

>   * The persistence layer is mainly a cache for the block application, so a node won't restart block application from genesis each time it's rebooted

Reviewer: @red-0ne Below are some tips.
cc @dylanlott (owner of the persistence module) 

Request: As you read through this documentation, PLEASE make notes of questions/problems and DO NOT HESITATE to submit a PR to edit it.

---

Below are some tips.

- [ ] 1. Have you read through the persistent documentation in the Wiki? https://github.com/pokt-network/pocket/wiki/Persistence-State-Hash-Protocol

![Screenshot 2023-08-04 at 10 44 44 AM](https://github.com/pokt-network/pocket/assets/1892194/25382fcb-cce1-4a23-9355-d41f502829a4)

- [ ] 2. Have you read through the persistence specification? https://github.com/pokt-network/pocket-network-protocol/
![Screenshot 2023-08-04 at 10 46 12 AM](https://github.com/pokt-network/pocket/assets/1892194/22faa42e-a9ba-4e51-aaa8-25c1fb538061)

- [ ] 3. Have you tried asking gPOKT? https://gpoktn.streamlit.app/

![Screenshot 2023-08-04 at 10 47 34 AM](https://github.com/pokt-network/pocket/assets/1892194/209990bd-d96e-481a-b4d1-b72369f5f7a3)

>   * The persistence layer is mainly a cache for the block application, so a node won't restart block application from genesis each time it's rebooted

Author: I missed reading the Persistence doc, will dive into it soon.

I see how coining it as "mainly a cache" may be misleading and not fully reflect its role. Also using the term "cache" was meant to put light on the idea that it handles computed data persistence that could be recomputed with block application, starting from genesis.

Maybe since this part was about the Persistence module seen from the POV of the Consensus mode, the term (restoration/restart/check) point would be more appropriate. Any better term is welcome.

    SyncRoutine->>BlockApplier:ApplyBlock
    BlockApplier-->>SyncRoutine: 

    Note left of BlockApplier: Tells if it's valid block and what are the  <br />changes to be made to the state
    SyncRoutine->>State:Update

    Note left of State: ValidatorSet should be updated here
    SyncRoutine->>Persistence:MarkBlockAsApplied

    SyncRoutine->>SyncRoutine:Wait(until block downloaded)
    Note left of BlockApplier: Wait for the next block to apply<br /> if it's not downloaded yet

    SyncRoutine->>SyncRoutine:If all blocks applied:<br />SignalSyncEnd
    Note right of SyncRoutine: StateSync has finished<br />Switch to consensus mode
  end
```

## Consensus Mode

In this mode, the current node is up to date w.r.t. the latest block applied by the network and can start now participating to the consensus process.

This process is driven by:
* A pace maker, that alerts the consensus flow about key timings in the block production process
  * `MinBlockTime`: The earliest time a leader node could reap the mempool and start proposing a new block
  * `RoundTimeout`: How much time a round is allowed to take before calling for another one

>   * Pacemaker uses a local clock and a node is only aware of the global pace through new round events

Reviewer: Per #953, there is no such concept of time in blockchains so I believe we need to reword some statements here.
